---
title: 'Full Disk Encryption in MicroOS. Maybe.'
author:
- Alberto Planas <aplanas@suse.de>
references:
- type: post-weblog
  id: sd-luks2
  title: Unlocking LUKS2 volumes with TPM2, FIDO2, PKCS#11 Security Hardware on systemd 248
  author:
  - name: Lennart Poettering
  issued:
    date-parts:
    - - 2021
      - 01
      - 13
  url: https://0pointer.net/blog/unlocking-luks2-volumes-with-tpm2-fido2-pkcs11-security-hardware-on-systemd-248.html
- type: post-weblog
  id: sd-abdel
  title: Authenticated Boot and Disk Encryption on Linux
  author:
  - name: Lennart Poettering
  issued:
    date-parts:
    - - 2021
      - 09
      - 23
  url: https://0pointer.net/blog/authenticated-boot-and-disk-encryption-on-linux.html
- type: post-weblog
  id: sd-fet
  title: Fitting Everything Together
  author:
  - name: Lennart Poettering
  issued:
    date-parts:
    - - 2022
      - 05
      - 03
  url: https://0pointer.net/blog/fitting-everything-together.html

- type: webpage
  id: ms-blfaq
  title: BitLocker Upgrading FAQ
  url: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/information-protection/bitlocker/bitlocker-upgrading-faq

- type: webpage
  id: ms-bl
  title: BitLocker
  issued:
    date-parts:
    - - 2022
      - 07
      - 13
  url: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/information-protection/bitlocker/bitlocker-overview
- type: webpage
  id: ap-fv
  title: Use FileVault to encrypt the startup disk on your Mac
  url: https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT204837

- type: webpage
  id: os-2pw
  title: Encrypted root file system
  url: https://en.opensuse.org/SDB:Encrypted_root_file_system
- type: webpage
  id: os-fde
  title: Setting up Full Disk Encryption on openSUSE Tumbleweed
  author:
  - name: Jörg Rödel
  issued:
    date-parts:
	- - 2021
	  - 08
  url: https://joros.blog/posts/opensuse-full-disk-encryption/
  
- type: webpage
  id: os-tpm2
  title: LUKS2, TPM2 and FIDO2
  url: https://en.opensuse.org/SDB:LUKS2,_TPM2_and_FIDO2
  
- type: webpage
  id: gr-tpm2-v1
  title: Automatic TPM Disk Unlock
  author:
  - name: Hernan Gatta
  issued:
    date-parts:
	- - 2022
	  - 01
	  - 24
  url: https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/grub-devel/2022-01/msg00125.html
- type: webpage
  id: gr-tpm2-v2
  title: Automatic TPM Disk Unlock
  author:
  - name: Hernan Gatta
  issued:
    date-parts:
	- - 2022
	  - 02
	  - 01
  url: https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/grub-devel/2022-01/msg00125.html

- type: book
  id: tcg-pccpfps
  title: TCG PC Client Platform Firmware Specification r1.05
  url: https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TCG_PCClient_PFP_r1p05_v23_pub.pdf

- type: webpage
  id: mc-2pw
  title: Add crypttab_entry to obviate the need to input password twice
  author:
  - name: Michael Chan
  issued:
    date-parts:
	- - 2022
	  - 06
	  - 09
  url: https://build.opensuse.org/package/view_file/home:okir:FDE/grub2/0009-Add-crypttab_entry-to-obviate-the-need-to-input-pass.patch?expand=1

- type: webpage
  id: ok-poc-git
  title: PoC for full disk encryption using grub2 key protector patches
  author:
  - Olaf Kirch
  url: https://github.com/okirch/fdepoc
- type: webpage
  id: ok-poc-obs
  title: Full Disk Encryption
  author:
  - Olaf Kirch
  url: https://build.opensuse.org/project/show/home:okir:FDE

- type: webpage
  id: sd-bls
  title: The Boot Loader Specification
  url: https://systemd.io/BOOT_LOADER_SPECIFICATION/

- type: webpage
  id: sd-bls-btrfs
  title: Discoverable Subvolumes Specification
  url: https://github.com/systemd/systemd/issues/23500

- type: webpage
  id: sd-bls-btrfs-dev
  title: The need for a discoverable sub-volumes specification
  url: https://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/systemd-devel/2021-November/thread.html

- type: webpage
  id: sd-pcr-sign
  title: Support for signed TPM2 PCR policies in cryptsetup/cryptenrolls/credentials
  author:
  - Lennart Poettering
  url: https://github.com/systemd/systemd/pull/24351
- type: webpage
  id: sd-pcr-ext
  title: Add extra parameters from systemd cryptenroll
  author:
  - Alberto Planas
  url: https://github.com/systemd/systemd/pull/24597
...


Full Disk Encryption in MicroOS
===============================

In this article we are going to describe the method for Full Disk
Encryption (FDE) selected for the SUSE Adaptable Linux Platform (ALP),
based on a new GRUB2 feature (under review) that include a new tool to
seal and unseal secrets using a local TPM2 device.

Later we will review a different method proposed for systemd, that use
several of its components to unlock the devices using different
methods, like a TPM2 device, a FIDO2 key or a recovery PIN or
passphrase.  It also includes a new tool to measure files and predict
PCR values, and sign authorization policies.

This solution is aiming to be a standard in the Linux ecosystem,
designed initially to be used to image based system (like ALP), but
also generic enough to be used (with adaptations) for traditional
package based distributions.

Because one point that this article want to emphasize is the relevance
of a standard and unified solution.  Other systems like Microsoft
Windows (BitLocker [@ms-bt]) or macOS (FileVault [@ap-fv]) are already
offering reference models for FDE.  Even when their solutions are not
perfect (for example, during an upgrade BitLocker can get temporary
disabled [@ms-blfaq]), they are providing value to the users.

In Linux there is no standard or reference architecture (or tool-set)
for FDE.  But the systemd project is actively working on standardizing
it (as commented, initially focused for image based distributions
[@sd-fet]).  SUSE and the openSUSE community should jump into this
effort, communicating and contributing with relation to our specific
needs and requirements.

The advantage of doing this is a better reference security model for
FDE in Linux, that can be reviewed, verified and adapted by many
security experts.  The strength of an open and shared solution (mostly
when putting together complex technologies together like in this case)
will outperform any ad-hoc solution.


Goals, or setting the expectations
==================================

FDE should protect all the relevant stored data in case of lost, theft
or physical access in to the system.  Should be noted that the
requirements can also be different when we are talking about
protecting a laptop (that can be stolen as a single unit, including
any security measure that is allocated inside) or a server farm (where
we can think about a hard disk replacement or wrongly disposed).

Another element to consider is that, ideally, the FDE will make
impossible to read the stored data (data encryption), but also should
protect us of the introduction of unauthorized changes (data
authentication).

Those two goals could be seen as equivalent, but they are orthogonal:
we can have one without the other, both together or none of them.

For example, if we encrypt our data we can guarantee the privacy. No
one without the decryption key can read the data.  But if a (maybe
random, maybe intentional) event changes the data in the storage
device, it can still be decrypted.  It is true that this will produce
corrupted data, but the decryption algorithm not necessarily can
detected the changes, and this can compromise the system later on.

On the other side we can have a clean file system, but this time with
CRC metadata hashed with secret key and stored alongside with the
file.  In this case we do not have any privacy protection (the file
can be freely read), but any change in the file (again, random or
intentional) will be automatically detected.  The encrypted CRC
metadata will not anymore match with the one calculated for the file.
The file cannot be updated without the key.

An effective FDE should protect us from attacks like:

* Storage device lost / stolen.  For example, if we are in a bus and
  we lost our hard disk, no other 3rd party can read the stored data.
* Full device lost / stolen.  If we lost the laptop, the stored data
  should still be safe.
* Data tampering (from outside).  If a 3rd party extract the disk from
  our laptop or server, replace some data blocks and re-attach the
  device, the system should detect the changes and stop the reading of
  the altered data.
* Storage device replacement.  If a 3rd party replace the hard disk,
  this replacement should be detected during the boot process, during
  the read of the data or via some user action.

Later we will compare the alternatives against this kind of attacks.

FDE is not a silver bullet.  It is not expected that FDE alone can
protect us from local or remote exploits.  If a 3rd party is able to
gain admin access in a running system, it can replace files in the
system (in `/boot` or in `/usr`) that would go undetected.  To protect
against this kind of attack we would new additional technology
designed to validate the health of out system, like remote
attestation, or enable IMA/EVM with signatures in the kernel.  This
technology should be seems as complementary for FDE.


Current status in openSUSE
==========================

There is a version of FDE already supported in SUSE / openSUSE and
YaST.  By default it is using LUKS1, that is the version of the Linux
Unified Key Setup (LUKS) specification that properly supported by
GRUB2.  But we can generate a LUKS2 installation if we write
`YAST_LUKS2_AVAILABLE=1` in the kernel command line, when booting the
installation media.

During the installation we can set a password, that will be registered
as a master key in the LUKS header.  The new installed system will
have `/boot` and the system root fully encrypted.

When booting, GRUB2 needs to ask the password, to unlock the `/boot`
partition and load the kernel, the `initrd` and the GRUB2
configuration file.  The same password will be asked later by the
kernel, to unlock the same device and continue reading the root file
system.

This second password request is an issue that can be fixed manually
later by the user.  It is documented in different sites, like for
example in the openSUSE wiki [@os-2pw] or in some community generated
content [@os-fde].  There are differences on those solutions (one
leverage more some systemd default), but in both approaches it is
required that the LUKS master key should be stored in clean in a new
`initrd` and in the root file system (so subsequent `initrd`
generation will contain the password after the update).  Because the
`initrd` it is living also in the encrypted partition, there is no
direct security issue.

We are not going to compare this solution against the expected goals
that a FDE solution should provide, but seems clear that if the
storage device (or the full computer) gets stolen, it should be
possible to change the kernel command line and recover any stored
secret.

A better approach for openSUSE it is described in [@os-tpm2].  It
explain how to do a manual installation with LUKS2 enabled, and use
`systemd-cryptenroll` to register the system TPM2 and seal a new key
under the status of certain PCR registers.  Beside it, also shows how
to register a FIDO2 key.  Because the component that decrypt the
volume is now systemd, and not GRUB2, the `/boot` partition cannot be
encrypted, but `/usr` and the rest of the system are.


A PoC based on GRUB2
====================

Early in 2022, a series of patches from Microsoft were released in the
GRUB2 devel mailing list [@gr-tpm2-v1] [@gr-tpm2-v2], proposing the
extension of the `cryptomount` command and the introduction of the
"key protectors" plugin framework.

A key protector is a piece of code, maybe provided by the user, that
can unlock a secret using some external resource (user input, network,
a FIDO2 key or a TPM2 device).  The proposed patch already provides a
key protector for the TPM2.

The `cryptomount` command now accept as a new parameter a list of
those configured key protectors.  Those will be triggered in the
specified order, until one succeed returning the key.  If all fails,
the current code will not show a passphrase and will abort the boot
process.

To help with the creation of the sealed key under the TPM2 storage
root key hierarchy, a new tool `grub-protect` is provided.  With this
tool we can specify the PCRs index used to do the sealing, but not the
value.  The tool will read the current values to perform the sealing,
and if no index is provided it will default to PCR7 (Secure Boot
State).  This register it is extended by the UEFI firmware during the
boot process, using some EFI variables that contains information about
the Secure Boot Policy [@tcg-pccpfps, sec. 3.3.4.8 PCR[7] – Secure
Boot Policy Measurements], that includes the content of SecureBoot,
PK, KEK, and the different databases content.

This approach requires an unencrypted partition accessible by GRUB2
(can be the EFI system partition or ESP, for example) that will store
the sealed (under TPM2) key used to unlock the LUKS devices, but
`/boot`, and the system root will be fully encrypted, and unlocked by
GRUB2 to read the kernel and the `initrd` and continue the boot.

The original patch left unanswered what to do when the kernel try to
unlock the same device later.  In this situation only GRUB2 knows the
password, that needs to be communicated to the kernel.  One solution,
implemented by Michael Chan (a patch living downstream [@mc-2pw]) adds
a new GRUB2 command, that will be used to copy the clean key file in
the same RAM disk where `initrd` is loaded.  This will share the file
securely, as it is never persisted in the system.

This model is the basis for the proof of concept developed by Olaf
Kirch [@ok-poc-git] [@ok-poc-obs] for SUSE ALP.

In this PoC a new tool (`pcr-oracle`) is developed to predict the PCR
values, adding several patches on GRUB2 to read the PCR values before
they are extended by the boot loader and store them in a set of EFI
variables, and do the manual extension from there.  The same can be
done analyzing the event log, replacing the updated components and
recalculating the final PCR values.

Because with `grub-protect` we can only list the indexes of the
affected PCR and not the expected values, the PoC seal the secret
using the `tpm2-tools` directly from calculated hashes of
`pcr-oracle`.

The PCRs recommended by the PoC are 0, 2, 4 (that measure the firmware
code, plugins, and the boot manager code), and 9 (GRUB2 loaded files).
This last one is extended by GRUB2 itself every time that a file is
read.  Usually they are the configuration files, the kernel and the
`initrd`.

GRUB2 will read very early the configuration file that explain how to
use the TPM2 to unlock `/boot` to read the GRUB2 menu configuration
file, the kernel and the `initird`.  This first configuration file
will be the only file read by GRUB2 that will participate in the PCR9
extension, making the job of `pcr-oracle` more feasible.  Should be
noted that GRUB2 also try to measure in the PCR9 the sealed key file
itself, but this will make impossible the effective sealing of this
key under this PCR.  There is an addition patch to GRUB2 that fix the
issue.


Does GRUB2 TPM2 patches meet the goals?
---------------------------------------

The current proposed patches by Microsoft does not provide a full
tool-set to develop a FDE solution.

The PoC already provide new developed tools to complete the solution.
Among the different GRUB2 patches (not all of them proposed to
upstream yet), there are the PCR predictor tool, the initial menu
configuration file, the first boot script among other potential tools
that can participate in the recovery process of the system in case of
miss predicted PCR values.

Some of those tools are generic by nature, but are adapted
specifically for APL, decreasing the chance of being part of any
upstream project.

A recovery process seems to be implemented in the PoC.  A passphrase
gets recorded during the first boot after the installation, and
registered as another valid LUKS key (in a different key slot).  To
recover the system (in case of a firmware upgrade or a miss-prediction
of the PCR values), the user needs to boot from a different media,
open the `dm-crypto` device with the registered passphrase, and
re-enlist the new PCR values.

GRUB2 does not support FIDO2 tokens, and the LUKS2 support is only
partial.  For example, the key derivation algorithm used will be
PBKDF2, instead the LUKS2 recommended argon2id.

But does this answer the main goals expected for FDE?

* Storage device lost / stolen: **YES**.  If the hard disk is lost it
  cannot be read without the TPM2 used to seal the key.
* Full device lost / stolen: **NO**.  Because there are elements in
  the boot process that are not measured (like the kernel, `initrd` or
  the kernel command line), if the laptop gets lost should be possible
  to change the kernel command line to access directly to a shell, and
  from there access to the rest of the system.
* Data tampering (from outside): **MOSTLY**.  If `btrfs` is used, and
  the file system is using `cow`, there will be a metadata that gets
  encrypted.  This has the side effect of producing data
  authentication the `btrfs` without any extra abstraction layer.  If
  the file system is not `btrfs` or `cow` is disabled then an attacker
  can change some blocks of data, and the system will try to decode
  them without validating the data.
* Storage device replacement: **NO**.  If the full disk gets replaced
  it would be very hard to detect that.  For the attacker it is
  impossible to provide a new disk that will be sealed with the local
  TPM2, but should be possible to provide a patched GRUB2 boot loader
  that makes the user believe that it is using it, when in fact is
  using a different LUKS2 key slot.


A systemd approach (upstream)
=============================

In a series of blog posts [@sd-luks2] [@sd-abdel], and later
summarized in [@sd-fet], Lennart Poettering described a FDE
architecture based on systemd.  This proposal is mostly focused for
image based distributions, but some of the components and architecture
elements can be used in package based distributions.

The `/boot` partition is following the Boot Loader Specification (see
the boot loader section for a description), storing the boot entries
in plain text files and the unified kernel files.  Those are composed
of a UEFI stub attached to the kernel, metadata and the `initrd`,
forming a single file.

The kernel is signed (using secure boot for the validation), and the
`initrd` is measured by the boot loader (`sd-boot`) extending the
PCR11 (from a 0x000..0 value).  The tool `systemd-measure` is used to
generate the signed authorization policy, that contain a prediction
for this PCR index (that will also participate later in the unsealing
of the key that unlocks the LUKS2 devices).

This model expect to use `dm-verity` for the `/usr` image, with the
root hash of the metadata Merkle tree signed by the manufacturer and
sealed with the user's TPM2.  The system data is not considered to
have any secret, so it will not be encrypted.  Because it cannot be
modified, the `squashfs` is proposed for this partition.

The root file system, that is where `/etc`, maybe `/var` and `/home`
are living, is encrypted using LUKS2.  The master key is randomly
generated, and several key slot are later registered.  A recent
component, `systemd-cryptenroll`, will register one key slot for a
generated recovery passphrase that is shown during the enrollment.
Another key slot is used to register a FIDO2 device is provided, and
another one will seal another key under the system's TPM2.

For this last case, the user can select a list of PCR registers, and
`systemd-cryptenroll` will use the current values to seal the key.
This area is also quickly evolving upstream.  A new feature is already
enabling signed PCR policies [@sd-pcr-sign].  This will allow the
distribution of expected values for a subset of PCRs that are easy to
predict by a 3rd party (for example for the kernel, `initrd`, kernel
command line, or the boot loader are hashes known by the distribution
releaser).  Those delivered PCR policies are signed by the OS creator.
Now the TPM2 can validate the signature and read the PCR expected
values from an external file.  With this feature it will be more easy
the upgrade of the system and the rollback into an older installation
in a A/B partition schema.

Another PR [@sd-pcr-ext] is extending the parser to allow the
indication of expected values during the local key enrollment.  This
will enable the possibility of a local external predictor that can be
used during the upgrade.

For storing secrets in `initrd` it is proposed to use
`systemd-sysext`.  With this tool we can provide user-created
extension images, that contains a GPT partition table, and an
encrypted partition.  This can be mounted and merged early in the boot
process as an `overlayfs`.


| Component           | Encrypted | Protection                                |
|---------------------|-----------|-------------------------------------------|
| /boot, ESP, cmdline | No        | Secure Boot + Measurement                 |
| /usr                | No        | dm-verity + Sealed and signed root hash   |
| /etc, /var, /home   | Yes       | dm-crypto + Sealed and signed PCR policy  |
| overlayfs           | Yes       | dm-verity + dm-crypto + Sealed PCR policy |

Table 1: Systemd approach for image based distributions


Applying it to MicroOS
----------------------

The original proposal apply better to image based distributions, like
SUSE ALP.  But the key ideas and general architecture can be also
reused for MicroOS, the openSUSE transactional distribution.

For that it will be required to engage upstream and contribute in the
different standards like the BLS and in the systemd project itself.
Aligning with upstream will also remove some *suseisms* that can cause
confusion or impede the reuse of previous knowledge.

In `/boot` we should consider to adapt the distribution to register
the boot entries as described in the BLS.  This will make openSUSE
ready to work with (a patched version of) GRUB2 and `sd-boot`.  This
is technically not a requirement for FDE, but moving to a more simple
boot schema will resolve some future issues, and make it more
compliant in scenarios where the GRUB2 boot loader is not possible or
allowed.

The boot loader will still validate the kernel certificate with secure
boot, and will measure it together with the `initrd` and the kernel
command line.  Inside the `initrd` a custom script will unseal (via
TPM2) a key hash used to feed the key-file parameter of the
`systemd-integritysetup` service.  This will open the `dm-integrity`
volume where `/usr` is stored, and the unsealed key will be used to
read the metadata and validate the content.

This custom script should be translated later as a upstream
contribution in `systemd-integritysetup` itself.  Should be noted that
this requirement was also identified by upstream, so any generic
contribution would make sense

Besides this, the `systemd-cryptsetup` service will use the TPM2 to
unseal the LUKS2 key slot for the root file system before mounting it.

Systemd now supports signed authorized policies, and this can be used
to create interchangeable PCR policies that will take care of the PCR
that can be predicted early, and that change always after any update.
For example, the natural candidates are PCR4, PCR8 and PCR9, that will
be different depending on the snapshot that we use.  The different
signed policies will all of the unlock the same LUKS2 key slot, so
they can be used for a rollback.

During the system update, a new set of PCR values will be predicted
and signed using the system key, generated during the installation and
kept in the encrypted partition.
 
The fixed system PCR values will be stored in a normal PCR policy
associated with the system TPM2, so both can be combined later for the
key unsealing.  This feature is not directly supported in systemd, but
the libraries are exporting the proper symbols and the TPM2 utility
functions are supporting both policies.

If a FIDO2 device has been enrolled with `systemd-cryptenroll` (for
the laptop case), a different LUKS2 key slot will be allocated.  This
can be used as an alternative to the TPM2 or as a recovery token in
case of a firmware update or a miss prediction on the PCR values.

As commented, `systemd-measure` is designed to unified kernel
measurement and signing.  The JSON document generated is documented,
and the unseal part is not dependent of the tool used to generate it,
not is limited to use the recommended PCR11.  This tool can be
extended to support the MicroOS model in a more generic way, as
[@sd-pcr-ext] is doing for `systemd-cryptenroll`.


| Component           | Encrypted | Protection                                     |
|---------------------|-----------|------------------------------------------------|
| /boot, ESP, cmdline | No        | Secure Boot + Measurement                      |
| /usr                | No        | dm-integrity + Keyed with a sealed hash        |
| /etc, /var, /home   | Yes       | dm-crypto + Sealed and local signed PCR policy |
| overlayfs           | Yes       | dm-verity + dm-crypto + Sealed PCR policy      |

Table 2: Systemd approach adapted to MicroOS


Does a systemd-based solution meet the goals?
---------------------------------------------

The mapping is reusing many of the upstream tools, and when there are
gaps (like in the PCR prediction component), it opens a contribution
opportunity for standardization, where MicroOS can be the reference.

The upstream / standard alignment remove most of the burden of the
code maintenance, and make the solution more easily auditable by
security experts.  TPM2, signatures, data authorization algorithms are
complicated, hard to architecture and very error prone.  An in-house
solution present more risk than a standard one.

Beside that, is this solution meeting the expected goals?

* Storage device lost / stolen: **YES**.  The TPM2, the FIDO2 token or
  the passphrase will protect the hard disk in case of its losts.
* Full device lost / stolen: **YES**.  For laptops it is recommended
  to use also the FIDO2 key, so when it get lost the TPM2 alone will
  not be enough to open the session and decrypt the device.
* Data tampering (from outside): **YES**.  The `/usr` is stored in
  clean, but over a `dm-integrity` device with HMAC keyed under TPM2.
  This means that an attacker cannot change the data without going
  undetected.  The rest of the partitions are encrypted and under
  `btrfs`, so the data authorization is also implicict in the
  encrypted metadata.
* Storage device replacement: **YES**.  The PCR authorizarion policy
  is signed with an user private key, stored in the encrypted section.
  Should be possible for the user to validate this signature to
  identify a replacement.  For the laptop use case the FIDO2 token
  will detect the replacement early in the boot process.


Aligment with upstream. The boot loader
---------------------------------------

One positive aspect is that with this effort we will move openSUSE
more close to the upstream initiatives with relation to FDE and the
Boot Loader Specification (BLS) [@sd-bls].

The BLS is used for FDE to make all those partitions recognizable by
systemd, to they can be auto-mounted directly without configuration.

This standard also propose a layout for the boot loader entries that
lives in the boot partition.  The entries are grouped per some ID
(system-provided like the machine-id), and each entry contains the
parameters from where to find the kernel, the `initrd` and the boot
options (kernel command line).

This specification is under development in areas that are relevant for
SUSE and openSUSE.  For example, upstream is still discussing how
should be named the BtrFS subvolumes for auto-discover [@sd-bls-btrfs]
[@sd-bls-btrfs-dev].  MicroOS can rename the subvolumes and make them
auto-discovered by systemd during boot time.

GRUB2 also has a patch (under review~ that enable the boot loader
entries section of the standard, making it possible to formulate
solutions that are both compatible with GRUB2 and `sd-boot`.

This is an active area where openSUSE should participate, as will
shape many of the future solutions developed across distributions.
